# What is 3110 about?

You might think this course is about OCaml.  It's not.

You might think this course is about data structures.  It's not.

You might think this course is about "weeding out" from the CS major.  It's not.

> Nan-in, a Japanese master during the Meiji era (1868-1912),
> received a university professor who came to inquire about Zen.
> Nan-in served tea. He poured his visitor's cup full, and then
> kept on pouring. The professor watched the overflow until he
> no longer could restrain himself. "It is overfull. No more will go in!"
> "Like this cup," Nan-in said, "you are full of your own opinions
> and speculations. How can I show you Zen unless you first empty your cup?"

**This course is about making you a better programmer.**

It's been observed that there is a [10x difference][10x] between
professional programmers' productivity.  Programming isn't hard.
Programming well is very hard.

[10x]: http://www.construx.com/10x_Software_Development/Productivity_Variations_Among_Software_Developers_and_Teams__The_Origin_of_10x/

## Data structures?

That phrase is in the course title for historical reasons, as I understand it.
There was once a 4000-level course titled Data Structures.  It got split up
and some of it injected into CS 2110 (Object-oriented Programming and
Data Structures) and some of it into CS 3110 (Data Structures and Functional
Programming).  Over time more of the data structures content has migrated
into 2110.  We'll use data structures as guiding examples in this course,
especially lists, trees, and dictionaries.  But they aren't the primary content.